---
pubtypes: ["poster"]
projects: ["nudy"]
title: "An Efficient Pseudo-Random Number Generator for Monte-Carlo Simulations using GPUs"
authors: "Siddharth Mohanty and Subho S. Banerjee and Dushyant Goyal and Ajit K. Mohanty and Federico Carminati"
venue: "International Workshop for Future Challenges in Tracking and Trigger Concepts 2011"
date: 2011
links:
  - name: Web
    icon: fa fa-globe
    url: "https://indico.cern.ch/event/93877/contributions/2118077/contribution.pdf"
---

Monte-Carlo technique enables one to generate random samples from distributions with known characteristics and helps to
make probability based inferences of the underlying physical processes. Fast and efficient Monte-Carlo particle transport
code particularly for high energy nuclear and particle physics experiments has become an important tool starting from
the design and fabrication of detectors to the modelling of the physics outcome as close as the reality.  Quite often
Monte-Carlo simulations require multivariate random numbers to be generated from correlated data both from normal and
non-normal distributions. Although several techniques exist for multivariate correlated samplings of varying degrees
of success, the most elegant method is the technique that uses the principal component analysis of the given correlation
matrix $R$ for generating multivariate random numbers with speci ed inter-correlations. While the component analysis is
suitable for multivariate normal distribution, it may not work always particularly when the distribution is non
Gaussian. In this work, we propose an extended alias sampling which was originally proposed by A. J. Walker in 1977 to
sample from an one dimensional distribution. This method is quite fast , efficient and reproduces the original
distributions quite accurately (verified through chi-square as well co-variance test). It may be mentioned here that this
method is quite robust and is applicable to all type of multivariate distribution irrespective of whether the
distribution is Gaussian or Non-Gaussian.

Although this method is quite general and can be applied to any dimensions, in this work we have restricted sampling
only from a two dimensional correlated distribution.  e motivation behind this study has been to develop a ROOT based
Monte-Carlo application package for low energy neutron transport down in energy to a few keV using the evaluated nuclear
data  le (ENDF) which is available in ROOT format. Work is in progress to apply this new method of alias technique to
the ENDF data set where the angle and energy distributions are strongly correlated.
