+++
title = "ML-driven Threat Detection and Mitigation Systems"
date = 2010-05-01
project = "tds"
description = "Real-time analysis of security alerts generated by host- and network-level security monitors."
weight = 8
+++

Large-scale enterprise networks must sustain mission-critical operations in an environment of
high-volume, sophisticated attack attempts, including the usual phishing, denial-of-service, and
credential-stealing attacks, daily. Our overarching goal is to stop these attacks preemptively
before system misuse and data leaks, for warehouse-scale and geo-distributed Internet systems.

The critical challenge is that data are highly sparse and unbalanced in terms of attack success.
Further, specific attack data are hard to obtain due to privacy and operational secrecy during
attack investigations. Another challenge is to preempt an ongoing/maturing attack before
system-integrity- or data-loss. Existing approaches are unable to do so. Despite the existence of
state-of-the-art security monitors, provenance techniques, and patching techniques, sophisticated
attacks in the wild often cause substantial havoc.

*Data Collection: Honeypots.* We have built [CAUDIT] and collected the largest number of SSH
brute-force attack attempts on a special-purpose honeypot with a large `/16` IP subspace. In
continuous operation from 2017 at [NCSA], it has collected >11 billion attack attempts.
Additionally, we have also collected ten years of data on all targeted attacks on NCSA. The system
enables executing audits on the live production networks by replaying of attack attempts recorded by
the honeypot, as well as blacklisting attackers using a black-hole router.

*Preempting Attacks.* We have built [PULSAR], a Bayesian model for attack preemption, trained on
past attacks, to discover and stop attacks before data exfiltration preemptively. The framework (i)
learns the statistical significance of patterns of events from past attacks; (ii) composes these
patterns into a probabilistic model to capture the progression of the attack; and (iii) decides on
preemptive actions. The system has been demonstrated retrospectively on 120 past attacks and on real
attacks in the wild, accurately identifying 91.7% of attacks before data loss.

*Hardware Accelerators.* We have demonstrated the use of the [AcMC²] high-level synthesis compiler
to generate hardware accelerators to deal with high volumes of alert data in real-time. The
accelerator uses a bump in wire architecture, to automatically infer the state of network and flow,
and make changes to flow-tables, thereby dropping malicious flow.

[NCSA]: http://www.ncsa.illinois.edu
[CAUDIT]: {{< relref "/publications/nsdi2019/index.md" >}}
[PULSAR]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08826
[AcMC²]: {{< relref "/publications/asplos2019/index.md">}}
